README.md, before:

# Toqua

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/rogercampos/toqua.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/rogercampos/toqua)

Collection of controller utilities for rails applications. Created with the intention of bringing back most of the nice things
about inherited resources, but in a more simple and explicit way.  

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'toqua'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install toqua

## Usage

This library contain different tools that can be used independently, described below.

### Transform params

Use this to change the value of a `params` key, for example:

```ruby
class MyController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::TransformParams
  transform_params(:q) { |v| JSON.parse(v) }
end
```

This would transform the value of `params[:q]` from a raw string into its json representation. The new value is whatever returns your block. Also works on nested keys:

`transform_params(user: :q) {|v| DataManipulation.change(v) }`

Or more levels of nesting:

`transform_params(user: {data: :q}) {|v| DataManipulation.change(v) }`


### Scoping

This allows you to further refine an `ActiveRecord::Relation`, optionally depending on conditionals. For example:


```ruby
class MyController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::Scoping
  
  scope {|s| s.where(parent_id: params[:parent_id])}
  
  def index
    @elements = apply_scopes(Element)
  end
end
``` 

The `scope` definitions are lambdas that receive an `ActiveRecord::Relation` as parameter and must return another
`AR::Relation`. They are chained in the order they're defined. To use them, you explicitly call `apply_scopes` with the initial
argument.

You can use `:if` or `:unless` to conditionally choose if execute the scope or not. Examples:

`scope(if: :show_all?) { |s| s.includes(:a, :b) }`

This will call the method `show_all?` defined in the controller and their return value (truthy or falsey) will indicate if the scope
applies or not. You can also use anything that responds to `:call` directly, ex:

`scope(if: -> { false }) { |s| s.all }`

Finally, you can also condition the scope execution based on the action on the controller:

`scope(only: :index) { |s| s.includes(:a, :b) }` 

This is the foundation used to build searching, sorting and pagination over an `AR::Relation`.

Used as an independent tool, it provides a way to define scopes used by multiple actions in the same place (authorization, eager loading, etc.).


### Pagination

This tool can be used to paginate collections using [Kaminari](https://github.com/kaminari/kaminari), providing some additional useful things. Example of basic usage:

```ruby
class MyController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::Pagination
  
  paginate
  
  def index
    @elements = apply_scopes(Element)
  end
end
```

As the `paginate` method uses scoping, you can pass the options of `:if, :unless and :action` that will get forwarded to the `scope` method, allowing
you to conditionally decide when to paginate. Ex:

`paginate(only: :index)`

Or, to paginate only on html but not xlsx format:

`paginate(unless: :xlsx?)`

The names of the url parameters used to identify the current page and the number of results per page are `page` and `per_page` by default, but can be changed using:

`paginate(page_key: "page", per_page_key: "per_page")`

The number of results in each page can be controlled with the `:per` option:

`paginate(per: 100)`

The last option available is `:headers`. If used, 3 additional headers will be attached into the response allowing you to know info about the pagination of the collection. This is useful for API clients. Ex:

`paginate(headers: true)`

The response will include the following headers:

- 'X-Pagination-Total': Total number of elements in the collection without pagination
- 'X-Pagination-Per-Page': Number of elements per page
- 'X-Pagination-Page': Number of the current page

Finally, the method `paginated?` available in both the controller and the views will tell you if the collection has been paginated or not.
 

### Search

Small utility to help in the implementation of searching, using [Doure](https://github.com/rogercampos/doure) as a way to filter an AR model. Given that you have a model with filters defined, ex:

```ruby
class Post < ApplicationRecord
  extend Doure::Filterable
  filter_class PostFilter
end

class PostFilter
  cont_filter(:title)
  cont_filter(:slug)
  present_filter(:scheduled_at)
  eq_filter(:id)
  filter(:category_id_eq) { |s, value| s.joins(:post_categories).where(post_categories: {category_id: value}) }
end
```

You can setup searching in the controller using:

 
```ruby
class PostsController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::Search
  
  searchable
  
  def index
    @elements = apply_scopes(Post)
  end
end
```

The parameter used to represent the search criteria is `:q`. 

The method `search_params` will give you a hash representing the contents of `:q`, which is the current search criteria, for example:

`{title_cont: "Air", category_id_eq: "12", slug_cont: "", scheduled_at_present: "", id_eq: ""}`

The method `active_search_params` will give you only the search parameters containing some value:

`{title_cont: "Air", category_id_eq: "12"}`

The method `search_object`, available in the view, gives an `ActiveModel` like object stuffed with the current `search_params`, so you can use that as the object 
of the search form to automatically pre-fill all the search inputs with their current value. Ex:

```slim
= form_for search_object do |f|
  = f.input :title_cont
  = f.input :category_id_eq, collection: ...
``` 

The method `searching?` will tell you if there's a current search or not.

Finally, you can define a `default_search_params` method in the controller to setup default search criteria:

```ruby
def default_search_params
  { visible_by_role: "editor" }
end
```



### Sorting

The sorting utility allows you to sort the collection, using the parameter `s` in the url with a format like `title+asc` or `title+desc`. Usage example:

```ruby
class PostsController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::Sorting
  
  sorting
  
  def index
    @elements = apply_scopes(Post)
  end
end
```

A helper to create sorting links easily is not directly provided by the gem, but can be something like this:
 
```ruby
  def sort_link(name, label = nil, opts = {})
    label ||= name.to_s.humanize
    current_attr_name, current_direction = params[:s].present? && params[:s].split("+").map(&:strip)

    next_direction = opts.fetch(:default_order, current_direction == "asc" ? "desc" : "asc")

    parameters = request.query_parameters
    parameters.merge!(opts[:link_params]) if opts[:link_params]

    dest_url = url_for(parameters.merge(s: "#{name}+#{next_direction}"))
    direction_icon = current_direction == "asc" ? "↑" : "↓"
    anchor = current_attr_name == name.to_s ? "#{label} #{direction_icon}" : label

    link_opts = opts.fetch(:link_opts, {})

    link_to(anchor, dest_url, link_opts)
  end
```

Then used as:

`= sort_link :title, "Title"`

### Keyset pagination

The keyset pagination is similar to the pagination utility, but working with [OrderQuery](https://github.com/glebm/order_query) to provide pagination that works with no offsets. Example usage:

```ruby
class PostsController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::KeysetPagination
  
  keyset_paginate :score_order
  
  def index
    @elements = apply_scopes(Post)
  end
end
```

It takes care of applying the correct scoping based on the id of the current element, as identified by the `:idx` parameter as default. With the optional `:headers` parameter some headers are also added into the response:

`keyset_paginate :score_order, headers: true`

Will generate those headers:

- `'X-KeysetPagination-Index'`: The `id` of the current element index.
- `'X-KeysetPagination-Next-Index'`: The `id` of the element to use as the next page.
- `'X-KeysetPagination-Prev-Index'`: The `id` of the element to use as the previous page.

The next and prev indexes are also available via the instance vars `@keyset_pagination_prev_index` and `@keyset_pagination_next_index`. 

If the value of `@keyset_pagination_prev_index` (or via header) is `-1` it means the previous page is the initial one. If it's `nil`, there's no previous page.

To generate pagination links, you can use something like this: 

```ruby
  def keyset_pagination_next_link(index_key = :idx)
    if @keyset_pagination_next_index
      url_for(request.GET.merge(index_key => @keyset_pagination_next_index))
    end
  end

  def keyset_pagination_prev_link(index_key = :idx)
    if @keyset_pagination_prev_index
      if @keyset_pagination_prev_index == -1
        url_for(request.GET.merge(index_key => nil))
      else
        url_for(request.GET.merge(index_key => @keyset_pagination_prev_index))
      end
    end
  end
```

### Final notes

If you use multiple scope declarations either mixed with the other utilities shown here or not, be aware of the order. For example, pagination must
always go last.  


## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake test` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/[USERNAME]/toqua.

Commit message:

add note about recursive open struct

README.md, after:

# Toqua

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/rogercampos/toqua.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/rogercampos/toqua)

Collection of controller utilities for rails applications. Created with the intention of bringing back most of the nice things
about inherited resources, but in a more simple and explicit way.  

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'toqua'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install toqua

## Usage

This library contain different tools that can be used independently, described below.

### Transform params

Use this to change the value of a `params` key, for example:

```ruby
class MyController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::TransformParams
  transform_params(:q) { |v| JSON.parse(v) }
end
```

This would transform the value of `params[:q]` from a raw string into its json representation. The new value is whatever returns your block. Also works on nested keys:

`transform_params(user: :q) {|v| DataManipulation.change(v) }`

Or more levels of nesting:

`transform_params(user: {data: :q}) {|v| DataManipulation.change(v) }`


### Scoping

This allows you to further refine an `ActiveRecord::Relation`, optionally depending on conditionals. For example:


```ruby
class MyController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::Scoping
  
  scope {|s| s.where(parent_id: params[:parent_id])}
  
  def index
    @elements = apply_scopes(Element)
  end
end
``` 

The `scope` definitions are lambdas that receive an `ActiveRecord::Relation` as parameter and must return another
`AR::Relation`. They are chained in the order they're defined. To use them, you explicitly call `apply_scopes` with the initial
argument.

You can use `:if` or `:unless` to conditionally choose if execute the scope or not. Examples:

`scope(if: :show_all?) { |s| s.includes(:a, :b) }`

This will call the method `show_all?` defined in the controller and their return value (truthy or falsey) will indicate if the scope
applies or not. You can also use anything that responds to `:call` directly, ex:

`scope(if: -> { false }) { |s| s.all }`

Finally, you can also condition the scope execution based on the action on the controller:

`scope(only: :index) { |s| s.includes(:a, :b) }` 

This is the foundation used to build searching, sorting and pagination over an `AR::Relation`.

Used as an independent tool, it provides a way to define scopes used by multiple actions in the same place (authorization, eager loading, etc.).


### Pagination

This tool can be used to paginate collections using [Kaminari](https://github.com/kaminari/kaminari), providing some additional useful things. Example of basic usage:

```ruby
class MyController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::Pagination
  
  paginate
  
  def index
    @elements = apply_scopes(Element)
  end
end
```

As the `paginate` method uses scoping, you can pass the options of `:if, :unless and :action` that will get forwarded to the `scope` method, allowing
you to conditionally decide when to paginate. Ex:

`paginate(only: :index)`

Or, to paginate only on html but not xlsx format:

`paginate(unless: :xlsx?)`

The names of the url parameters used to identify the current page and the number of results per page are `page` and `per_page` by default, but can be changed using:

`paginate(page_key: "page", per_page_key: "per_page")`

The number of results in each page can be controlled with the `:per` option:

`paginate(per: 100)`

The last option available is `:headers`. If used, 3 additional headers will be attached into the response allowing you to know info about the pagination of the collection. This is useful for API clients. Ex:

`paginate(headers: true)`

The response will include the following headers:

- 'X-Pagination-Total': Total number of elements in the collection without pagination
- 'X-Pagination-Per-Page': Number of elements per page
- 'X-Pagination-Page': Number of the current page

Finally, the method `paginated?` available in both the controller and the views will tell you if the collection has been paginated or not.
 

### Search

Small utility to help in the implementation of searching, using [Doure](https://github.com/rogercampos/doure) as a way to filter an AR model. You'll also need to include [recursive struct](https://github.com/aetherknight/recursive-open-struct) as a dependency to use search. Given that you have a model with filters defined, ex:

```ruby
class Post < ApplicationRecord
  extend Doure::Filterable
  filter_class PostFilter
end

class PostFilter
  cont_filter(:title)
  cont_filter(:slug)
  present_filter(:scheduled_at)
  eq_filter(:id)
  filter(:category_id_eq) { |s, value| s.joins(:post_categories).where(post_categories: {category_id: value}) }
end
```

You can setup searching in the controller using:

 
```ruby
class PostsController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::Search
  
  searchable
  
  def index
    @elements = apply_scopes(Post)
  end
end
```

The parameter used to represent the search criteria is `:q`. 

The method `search_params` will give you a hash representing the contents of `:q`, which is the current search criteria, for example:

`{title_cont: "Air", category_id_eq: "12", slug_cont: "", scheduled_at_present: "", id_eq: ""}`

The method `active_search_params` will give you only the search parameters containing some value:

`{title_cont: "Air", category_id_eq: "12"}`

The method `search_object`, available in the view, gives an `ActiveModel` like object stuffed with the current `search_params`, so you can use that as the object 
of the search form to automatically pre-fill all the search inputs with their current value. Ex:

```slim
= form_for search_object do |f|
  = f.input :title_cont
  = f.input :category_id_eq, collection: ...
``` 

The method `searching?` will tell you if there's a current search or not.

Finally, you can define a `default_search_params` method in the controller to setup default search criteria:

```ruby
def default_search_params
  { visible_by_role: "editor" }
end
```

As a final note, remember to take care of properly sanitize the input of your search criteria to avoid unintended usage, using TransformParams as seen before or by any other means. Toqua doesn't apply any sanitization by default, since the values that may come from the view can vary between use cases (strings, arrays, hashes, etc.). 


### Sorting

The sorting utility allows you to sort the collection, using the parameter `s` in the url with a format like `title+asc` or `title+desc`. Usage example:

```ruby
class PostsController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::Sorting
  
  sorting
  
  def index
    @elements = apply_scopes(Post)
  end
end
```

A helper to create sorting links easily is not directly provided by the gem, but can be something like this:
 
```ruby
  def sort_link(name, label = nil, opts = {})
    label ||= name.to_s.humanize
    current_attr_name, current_direction = params[:s].present? && params[:s].split("+").map(&:strip)

    next_direction = opts.fetch(:default_order, current_direction == "asc" ? "desc" : "asc")

    parameters = request.query_parameters
    parameters.merge!(opts[:link_params]) if opts[:link_params]

    dest_url = url_for(parameters.merge(s: "#{name}+#{next_direction}"))
    direction_icon = current_direction == "asc" ? "↑" : "↓"
    anchor = current_attr_name == name.to_s ? "#{label} #{direction_icon}" : label

    link_opts = opts.fetch(:link_opts, {})

    link_to(anchor, dest_url, link_opts)
  end
```

Then used as:

`= sort_link :title, "Title"`

### Keyset pagination

The keyset pagination is similar to the pagination utility, but working with [OrderQuery](https://github.com/glebm/order_query) to provide pagination that works with no offsets. Example usage:

```ruby
class PostsController < ApplicationController
  include Toqua::KeysetPagination
  
  keyset_paginate :score_order
  
  def index
    @elements = apply_scopes(Post)
  end
end
```

It takes care of applying the correct scoping based on the id of the current element, as identified by the `:idx` parameter as default. With the optional `:headers` parameter some headers are also added into the response:

`keyset_paginate :score_order, headers: true`

Will generate those headers:

- `'X-KeysetPagination-Index'`: The `id` of the current element index.
- `'X-KeysetPagination-Next-Index'`: The `id` of the element to use as the next page.
- `'X-KeysetPagination-Prev-Index'`: The `id` of the element to use as the previous page.

The next and prev indexes are also available via the instance vars `@keyset_pagination_prev_index` and `@keyset_pagination_next_index`. 

If the value of `@keyset_pagination_prev_index` (or via header) is `-1` it means the previous page is the initial one. If it's `nil`, there's no previous page.

To generate pagination links, you can use something like this: 

```ruby
  def keyset_pagination_next_link(index_key = :idx)
    if @keyset_pagination_next_index
      url_for(request.GET.merge(index_key => @keyset_pagination_next_index))
    end
  end

  def keyset_pagination_prev_link(index_key = :idx)
    if @keyset_pagination_prev_index
      if @keyset_pagination_prev_index == -1
        url_for(request.GET.merge(index_key => nil))
      else
        url_for(request.GET.merge(index_key => @keyset_pagination_prev_index))
      end
    end
  end
```

### Final notes

If you use multiple scope declarations either mixed with the other utilities shown here or not, be aware of the order. For example, pagination must
always go last.  


## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake test` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/[USERNAME]/toqua.
